# Projecting Multimorbidity and Mortality under Demographic Change and Preventive Interventions
As populations age, the rise of multimorbidity poses a significant healthcare challenge. However, our ability to quantitatively forecast the progression of multimorbidity remains limited. Leveraging a nationwide dataset comprising approximately 45 million hospital stays spanning 17 years in Austria, we develop a new compartmental model for chronic disease trajectories across 132 distinct multimorbidity patterns (compartments). Each compartment represents a distinct constellation of co-occurring chronic conditions, with transitions modeled as age- and sex-dependent probabilities. We use the compartmental disease trajectory model (CDTM) to simulate disease trajectories to 2030, estimating the frequency of all empirically observed co-occurrence patterns among more than 100 diagnosis groups. We demonstrate the model's utility in identifying high-impact prevention targets—showing, for example, that a 5% reduction in new cases of hypertensive disease (I10--I15) leads to a 0.57 (SD 0.06)\% reduction in all-cause mortality over a 15-year period, and a 0.57 (SD 0.07)% reduction in mortality for malignant neoplasms (C00--C97). We also evaluate long-term impacts of SARS-CoV-2 sequelae, projecting earlier and more frequent hospitalizations across a range of diagnoses. Our fully data-driven modelling approach identifies leverage points for proactive preparation by physicians and policymakers to reduce the overall disease burden in the population, emphasizing patient-centered healthcare planning in aging societies.
